Known for his air of austerity, Guts is a gruff, cynical man holding an overall bleak outlook on life. This is a consequence of enduring waves of suffering and numerous betrayals since his youth, as nearly all highlights of his life have, in time, become lows.
In spite of his guarded, brooding exterior, he shows a more easygoing, compassionate side around the people he trusts, appearing markedly less unsociable and distant, though still retaining his dry candidness.
Even as his inner darkness festers deep within him and its temptation becomes increasingly harder to resist, he retains his empathy and compassion, refusing to discard his humanity.

In his formative years, Guts is devoid of true purpose in life, killing as a child mercenary merely as a means to survive. As a blank slate, he often finds himself seeking validation from those he respects most, content so long as "one person [looks his] way".[9] His precariousness slowly develops into individuality upon meeting Griffith – someone whom he eventually seeks to stand beside as an equal, rather than be looked down on by. The swordsman then embarks on a journey of self-discovery, in which he comes to acknowledge his lifelong bond with and passion for the sword. Upon realizing this, he begins devoting himself to honing his craft and fighting ever stronger adversaries, having a newfound purpose in life through this.[15]


Eventually, Guts is able to overcome his apprehension toward camaraderie, grateful for the companionship of his new group members.

After surviving the Eclipse, Guts grows vindictive, wanting nothing other than to hunt down and slaughter any apostle he encounters, and, more importantly, exact revenge on Griffith and the God Hand. He leaves behind a regressed Casca for two years to embark on his warpath against demonkind. On his two-year hunt, Guts becomes largely self-centered and anti-social, indifferent to the suffering of others and detesting those whom he deems weak.[1] His reclusive nature and hostility toward those attempting to connect with him stem from a fear of creating new emotional attachments                                                                                                                                                                ; fear of making precious new companions akin to the comrades he lost to the Eclipse.[16] With time, due in large part to the efforts of Puck,[17] Guts ceases his solitary struggle and solicits the help of fellow travelers, slowly fostering new companionship with them.[18] Despite his initial apprehension toward displaying affection for his new comrades, he comes to appreciate the bonds he makes with them and finds himself grateful for having their individual strengths to rely on.[19][20]

Above all else, Guts is the personification of perseverance and resilience. Through all of his numerous trials and tribulations, he has never yielded to the flow of causality and continues to subsist against seemingly insurmountable odds. Indeed, Guts is an ardent detractor of the idea of destiny, believing his actions to ultimately be of his own volition and paying no heed to such a supposed certainty.[21][22]
